Add OTel metrics raw processor doc to doc website. (#3235)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/processors/otel-metrics-raw.md

---
layout: default
title: otel metrics raw
parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 45
---

# otel metrics raw

The `otel metrics raw` processor serializes a collection of `ExportMetricsServiceRequest` sent from the [otel-metrics-source]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/sources/otel-metrics-source/) into a collection of string records.

## Usage

> See the following `.yaml` configuration file:

Author: What YAML file? What is it called?

Reviewer: This also refers to `pipeline.yaml` file. The code block that follows gives an example, which shows only the processor configuration section of a pipeline yaml.

Author: @asifsmohammed All other docs related to this one contain the following text under the Usage section:
```o get started, create the following `pipeline.yaml` file: 

```yaml
pipeline:
  source:
    file:
      path: "/full/path/to/logs_json.log"
      record_type: "event"
      format: "json"
  processor:
    - substitute_string:
        entries:
          - source: "message"
            from: ":"
            to: "-"
  sink:
    - stdout:
```
{% include copy.html %}```

Does this text apply here? Otherwise the Usage section is very short and doesn't provide much context.

```
processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor
```

## Configuration

> You can create detailed representations of histogram buckets and their boundaries. You can control this feature by using the following parameters:

Author: What is a histogram bucket? Do we have any docs that explain this?

Reviewer: We don't have any docs on it. I think it refers to what's described here: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/data-model/#histogram

---
layout: default

> title: otel metrics raw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: OTel metrics raw processor
```

parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines

> nav_order: 45

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nav_order: 72
```

---

> # otel metrics raw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# otel_metrics_raw
```

Author: This will be resolved with #3802 .

> The `otel metrics raw` processor serializes a collection of `ExportMetricsServiceRequest` sent from the [otel-metrics-source]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/sources/otel-metrics-source/) into a collection of string records.

Reviewer 2: Switching the processor name to match how it appears in code.

```suggestion
The `otel_metrics_raw_processor` processor serializes a collection of `ExportMetricsServiceRequest` sent from the [otel-metrics-source]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/sources/otel-metrics-source/) into a collection of string records.
```

Author: We should actually change this to "OTel metrics raw processor" without the tic marks or underscores. This is something that will also need to be addressed across the docset.

## Usage

> To get started, you can add the following processor to your `.yaml` configuration file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To get started, you can add the following processor to your `pipeline.yaml` configuration file:
```

> ``` YAML

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``` yaml
```

processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor:
```

## Configuration

The following table describes the different parameters used to configure histogram buckets and their default values. A histogram displays numerical data by grouping data into buckets. You can use histrogram buckets to view sets of events that are organized by the total event count and aggregate sum for all events. For more detailed information, see (OpenTelemetry Histograms)[https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/metrics/data-model/#histogram].

| Parameter | Default value | Description |

> | :---    | :---    | :---    |

Reviewer 2: Are all of these parameters required or optional?

Author: @sharraj

Author: @Naarcha-AWS Raj has specified that these are all optional.

| `calculate_histogram_buckets` | `True` | Whether or not to calculate histogram buckets. |
| `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets` | `True` | Whether or not to calculate exponential histogram buckets. |
| `exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale` | `10` | Maximum allowed scale in exponential histogram calculation. | 
| `flatten_attributes` | `False` | Whether or not to flatten the `attributes` field in the JSON data. |

> If `calculate_histogram_buckets` is not set to `false`, the following JSON file will be added to every histogram JSON. If `flatten_attributes` is set to `false`, the JSON string format of the metrics does not change the attributes field. If `flatten_attributes` is set to `true`, the values in the attributes field are placed in the parent JSON object. The default value is `true`. See the following JSON example:

Reviewer 2: I would add sub-headers to this section to make it more readable, marked by each individual parameter and their respective JSON example. For example,

```suggestion
### `calculate_histogram_buckets`

If `calculate_histogram_buckets` is not set to `false`, the following JSON file will be added to every histogram JSON. If `flatten_attributes` is set to `false`, the JSON string format of the metrics does not change the attributes field. If `flatten_attributes` is set to `true`, the values in the attributes field are placed in the parent JSON object. The default value is `true`. See the following JSON example:
```

```json
 "buckets": [
    {
      "min": 0.0,
      "max": 5.0,
      "count": 2
    },
    {
      "min": 5.0,
      "max": 10.0,
      "count": 5
    }
  ]
```

> You can create detailed representations of histogram buckets and their boundaries. You can control this feature by using the following parameters in a YAML file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can create detailed representations of histogram buckets and their boundaries. You can control this feature by using the following parameters your `pipeline.yaml` file:
```

```yaml
  processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor:
        calculate_histogram_buckets: true
        calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets: true
        exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale: 10
        flatten_attributes: false
```

> Each array element describes one bucket. Each bucket contains the lower boundary, upper boundary, and its value count. This is a specific form of denser OpenTelemetry representation that is a part of the JSON output created by the following plugin. See the following `JSON` file, which is added to each historgram `JSON` by the otel metrics raw processor:

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed Re-worded this slightly. Do we have another word to replace "denser" here? It is unclear what that means to someone unfamiliar with otel.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what dense representation exactly is, but it's the right word. OpenTelemetry exponential histograms has a dense representation. Similar wording exists on line 106. This can be changed to "form of the dense OpenTelemetry representation" to be consistent with lone 106.

> Each array element describes one bucket. Each bucket contains the lower boundary, upper boundary, and its value count. This is a specific form of more detailed OpenTelemetry representation that is a part of the JSON output created by the following plugin. See the following `JSON` file, which is added to each histogram `JSON` by the otel metrics raw processor:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each array element describes one bucket. Each bucket contains the lower boundary, upper boundary, and its value count. This is a specific form of more detailed OpenTelemetry representation that is a part of the JSON output created by the following plugin. See the following `JSON` file, which is added to each histogram `JSON` by the OTel metrics raw processor:
```

```json
 "explicitBounds": [
    5.0,
    10.0
  ],
   "bucketCountsList": [
    2,
    5
  ]
```

> If `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets` is set to `true` (the default setting), the following JSON values are added to each JSON histogram:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets`

If `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets` is set to `true` (the default setting), the following JSON values are added to each JSON histogram:
```

```json

    "negativeBuckets": [
        {
        "min": 0.0,
        "max": 5.0,
        "count": 2
        },
        {
        "min": 5.0,
        "max": 10.0,
        "count": 5
        }
    ],
...
    "positiveBuckets": [
        {
        "min": 0.0,
        "max": 5.0,
        "count": 2
        },
        {
        "min": 5.0,
        "max": 10.0,
        "count": 5
        }
    ],
```

The following JSON file is a more detailed form of the dense OpenTelemetry representation, which consists of negative and positive buckets, a scale parameter, offset, and list of bucket counts. 

```json
    "negative": [
        1,
        2,
        3
    ],
    "positive": [
        1,
        2,
        3
    ],
    "scale" : -3,
    "negativeOffset" : 0,
    "positiveOffset" : 1
```

> The `exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale` parameter defines the maximum allowed scale for an exponential histogram. If you increase this parameter, you will increase potential memory consumption. See the [OpenTelemetry specifications](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto) for more information on exponential histograms and their computational complexity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### `exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale`

The `exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale` parameter defines the maximum allowed scale for an exponential histogram. If you increase this parameter, you will increase potential memory consumption. See the [OpenTelemetry specifications](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto) for more information on exponential histograms and their computational complexity.
```

> All exponential histograms that have a scale that is above the configured parameter (by default, a value of `10`) are discarded and logged with an error level. You can check the llog that Data Prepper creates to see the `ERROR` log message.

Reviewer 4: nit: "llog" --> "log"

```json
 "buckets": [
    {
      "min": 0.0,
      "max": 5.0,
      "count": 2
    },
    {
      "min": 5.0,
      "max": 10.0,
      "count": 5
    }
  ]
```

You can create detailed representations of histogram buckets and their boundaries. You can control this feature by using the following parameters in a YAML file:

```yaml
  processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor:
        calculate_histogram_buckets: true
        calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets: true
        exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale: 10
        flatten_attributes: false
```

Each array element describes one bucket. Each bucket contains the lower boundary, upper boundary, and its value count. This is a specific form of denser OpenTelemetry representation that is a part of the JSON output created by the following plugin:

> <!--- Is this correct? Is this a plugin? It looks like a JSON file.--->

Author: @dlvenable @asifsmohammed Is this correct? Is this a plugin? This looks like a JSON file. Is it being used by this plugin?

Author: @cmanning09 @oeyh @chenqi0805  Is this correct? Is this a plugin? This looks like a JSON file. Is it being used by this plugin?

Reviewer 3: This is the JSON which will be added to every histogram JSON by the processor. It is correct and yes it's JSON.

---
layout: default
title: otel metrics raw
parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 45
---

# otel metrics raw

The `otel metrics raw` processor serializes a collection of `ExportMetricsServiceRequest` sent from the [otel-metrics-source]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/sources/otel-metrics-source/) into a collection of string records.

## Usage

See the following `.yaml` configuration file:

```
processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor
```

## Configuration

You can create detailed representations of histogram buckets and their boundaries. You can control this feature by using the following parameters:

```yaml
  processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor:
        calculate_histogram_buckets: true
        calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets: true
        exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale: 10
        flatten_attributes: false
```

The following table describes the different parameters used with histogram buckets and their default values.

> | Parameter | Default value | Description |

Author: This table is incomplete and needs more information. What are the defaults if a parameter is provided? What do each of these parameters do/represent?

Reviewer: Thanks for pointing it out! The table looks off. Let me check with team. We may need to update the code and the README in Data Prepper first.

Reviewer: Checked again. Data prepper code is good. The table should be something like this:

| Parameter | Default value | Description |
| :---    | :---    | :---    |
| `calculate_histogram_buckets` | True | Whether to calculate histogram buckets or not |
| `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets` | True | Whether to calculate exponential histogram buckets or not |
| `exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale` | 10 | Max scale allowed in exponential histogram calculation |
| `flatten_attributes` | False | Whether to flatten the "attributes" field in the JSON data or not |

    {
      "min": 0.0,
      "max": 5.0,
      "count": 2
    },
    {
      "min": 5.0,
      "max": 10.0,
      "count": 5
    }
  ]
```

You can create detailed representations of histogram buckets and their boundaries. You can control this feature by using the following parameters in a YAML file:

```yaml
  processor:
    - otel_metrics_raw_processor:
        calculate_histogram_buckets: true
        calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets: true
        exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale: 10
        flatten_attributes: false
```

Each array element describes one bucket. Each bucket contains the lower boundary, upper boundary, and its value count. This is a specific form of denser OpenTelemetry representation that is a part of the JSON output created by the following plugin:

<!--- Is this correct? Is this a plugin? It looks like a JSON file.--->

```json
 "explicitBounds": [
    5.0,
    10.0
  ],
   "bucketCountsList": [
    2,
    5
  ]
```

> If `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets` is not set to `false`, the following JSON values are added to each JSON historgram:

Author: Why are these values added?

Reviewer: Because `calculate_exponential_histogram_buckets` is by default true, those values will be added.

        {
        "min": 0.0,
        "max": 5.0,
        "count": 2
        },
        {
        "min": 5.0,
        "max": 10.0,
        "count": 5
        }
    ],
...
    "positiveBuckets": [
        {
        "min": 0.0,
        "max": 5.0,
        "count": 2
        },
        {
        "min": 5.0,
        "max": 10.0,
        "count": 5
        }
    ],
```

The following JSON file is a more detailed form of the dense OpenTelemetry representation, which consists of negative and positive buckets, a scale parameter, offset, and list of bucket counts. 

```json
    "negative": [
        1,
        2,
        3
    ],
    "positive": [
        1,
        2,
        3
    ],
    "scale" : -3,
    "negativeOffset" : 0,
    "positiveOffset" : 1
```

The `exponential_histogram_max_allowed_scale` parameter defines the maximum allowed scale for an exponential histogram. Increasing this parameter increases potential memory consumption. See the [OpenTelemetry specifications](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto) for more information on exponential histograms and their computational complexity.

> All exponential histograms that have a scale that is above the configured parameter (by default, a value of `10`) are discarded and logged with an error level. 

Author: What is an error level and what happens when something is logged with it?

Reviewer: This means Data Prepper will create a log message marked with ERROR. If a user checks the Data Prepper log, the user will see the message.

All exponential histograms that have a scale that is above the configured parameter (by default, a value of `10`) are discarded and logged with an error level. You can check the llog that Data Prepper creates to see the `ERROR` log message.

**Note**: The absolute scale value is used for comparison, so a scale of `-11` that is treated equally to `11` exceeds the configured value of `10` and can be discarded.

## Metrics

The following table describes metrics that are common to all processors.

| Metric name | Type | Description |
| ------------- | ---- | -----------|
| `recordsIn` | Counter | Metric representing the ingress of records to a pipeline component. |
| `recordsOut` | Counter | Metric representing the egress of records from a pipeline component. |

> | `timeElapsed` | Timer | Metric representing the time elapsed during execution of a pipeline component. |

Author: @dlvenable Do you still want to keep this section?

Reviewer 3: Yes, from the discussion we had offline we decided to keep these.

Reviewer 3: pipeline component in the description is too generic. We should either replace it with processor name (which feels redundant to me since these metrics are documented for each processor separately). Or remove the pipeline component completely,  something similar to what I added below
```
| Metric name | Type | Description |
| ------------- | ---- | -----------|
| `recordsIn` | Counter | Metric representing the number of ingress records. |
| `recordsOut` | Counter | Metric representing the number of egress records. |
| `timeElapsed` | Timer | Metric representing the time elapsed during execution of records. |
```

Author: @asifsmohammed This looks great. Thank you!

---
layout: default

> title: OTel metrics raw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: `otel_metrics_raw_processor`
```

Author: We can't use tic marks in the title or in headings. In all other instances, I will apply this change. Thanks!

parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 72
---

# OTel metrics raw

> The OTel metrics raw processor serializes a collection of `ExportMetricsServiceRequest` sent from the [OTel metrics source]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/sources/otel-metrics-source/) into a collection of string records.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `otel_metrics_raw_processor` serializes a collection of `ExportMetricsServiceRequest` sent from the [OTel metrics source]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}//data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/sources/otel-metrics-source/) into a collection of string records.
```

Author: @Naarcha-AWS @natebower Should we include "processor" in the tic marks? Or right after it?

Reviewer 5: The text in tic marks should reflect the name of the processor as it will appear to the user.

---
layout: default

> title: OTel metrics raw

Reviewer 4: @carolxob, Raj indicated that we're renaming this processor to Otel metrics (removing raw). I told him to comment but looks like he hasn't.

Author: @lizsnyder Thanks for letting me know! I'll make sure this change is incorporated.
